---
title: Web Forms Overview
---
# ASP.Net Web Forms

Asp.net web forms are one of the ways in which you can send content to the browser and process requests on the server side. Depending upon how you have set up your website, your asp.net forms will consist either 2 or 3 separate files. With Visual Studio you can create either a **Web Application Project** (WAP) or a **Web Site** as your browser-based application. 

Web forms in a web application project appear as a set of three files, distinguished by their file extensions: 

- the `.aspx` file contains HTML markup and asp.net controls as the basis of the content that is sent to browser.
- the `.aspx.cs` file is where we write the server side code to process request for the web page; this file contains a class that inherits from the Page class in the asp.net framework.
- the `.aspx.designer.cs` file is generated by Visual Studio as you edit and modify the .aspx page; zip code in this file declares the properties that correspond to the asp.net on the web page, allowing you programmatic access to those controls and their content in your aspx.cs file.

Web forms in a website only contain the .aspx and the .aspx.cs files. The designer file is not needed because with websites the web server will dynamically interpret the .aspx file to generate the needed code whenever the page is requested. Thus with a website you can simply assume that the designer file is available, although unseen.

The visual studio editor for .aspx files allow you to edit the file in either a Design or Source View. In the design view, the editor works has a kind of wysiwyg editor where you can type content, apply HTML formatting, and drag and drop asp.net controls from the toolbox onto the editor. In the source View, the editor is a text editor with full intellisense and color coding of the markup for the aspx page. Both views represent the markup of the web form. The difference between the two is that in the source View you're directly editing the code whereas with the design view visual Studio is editing based upon the changes you make in the wysiwyg editor. Ultimately the aspx file is just a text file. 

When the web server handles a request for an aspx page, it does so by instantiating the page as an object and calling various methods on the page as part of the pages life cycle. Near the end of that life cycle, the page is rendered by generating HTML CSS and JavaScript that can be sent to the browser by the web server. To truly appreciate how this works, you need to have a solid grasp OOP programming basics. 

Most of the code that makes your web form work exists inside of a base class that your form inherits: the Page class. Likewise, the controls on your web form get their functionality corresponding classes in the asp.net. For example the text box control gets all of its functionality from the TextBox class. Each control has its own class with its unique functionality that allows it to process and display its unique content. Some of the most commonly asp.net are: 

- **TextBox** - Allows the user to enter text input that can be submitted to the form
- **Label** - Displays text on the page; the text can be altered programmatically
- **DropDownList** - Displays a drop-down set of items that can be selected by the user
- **Button** - Renders a button that allows the user to submit the form and invode a method on the web page
- **LinkButton** - Renders a hyperlink that is processed as a button to submit the form and invoke a method on the web page
- **RadioButton** - Renders a radio button on the form that can be selected by the user
- **CheckBox** - Renders a check box on the form that can be selected or de-seleccted by the user
- **RadioButtonList** - Renders a list of radio buttons that act in concert so that only one item can be selected from the list of items
- **CheckBoxList** - Renders a list of check boxes that act in concert; multiple items may be selected by the user

